The Kidney: Structure
Humans have two kidneys
The kidneys are responsible for carrying out two very important functions
As an osmoregulatory organ they regulate the water content of the blood
This is essential for maintaining blood pressure and to prevent cell damage
occurring due to osmosis
As an excretory organ they enable the excretion of the toxic waste products of
metabolism, such as urea, and substances in excess of requirements, such as salts
The kidneys are located above the bladder. They are supplied with blood by the renal
artery and connect to the bladder via the ureter.
The Function of the Kidneys & their Associated Structures Table
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 12
The gross structure of the kidney
The kidney itself is surrounded by an outer layer known as the fibrous capsule
Beneath the fibrous capsule, the kidney has three main regions
The cortex
The medulla
The renal pelvis
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 13
The kidney has three main regions; the cortex, the medulla, and the renal pelvis.
The microscopic structure of the kidney
Each kidney contains thousands of tiny tubes, or tubules, known as nephrons
Nephrons are the functional unit of the kidney and are responsible for the formation of
urine
Different parts of the nephron are found in different regions of the kidney
The cortex
Location of the glomerulus, Bowman’s capsule, proximal convoluted tubule,
and distal convoluted tubule
The medulla
Location of the loop of Henle and collecting duct
The renal pelvis
All kidney nephrons drain into this structure, which connects to the ureter
There are two types of nephrons in the kidney
Cortical nephrons
These occur mainly in the renal cortex and have a short loop of Henle that
barely enters the medulla
They make up about 85% of the nephrons in a human kidney
Juxtamedullary nephrons
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 14
They have long loops of Henle that span across the entire medulla
Very efficient at conserving water in the body
The nephron spans the three regions of the kidney.
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 15
There is also a network of blood vessels associated with each nephron
Within the Bowman’s capsule of each nephron is a structure known as the glomerulus
Each glomerulus is supplied with blood by an afferent arteriole which carries blood
from the renal artery
The afferent arteriole splits into a ball of capillaries that forms the glomerulus itself
The capillaries of the glomerulus rejoin to form the efferent arteriole
Blood flows from the glomerulus into a network of capillaries that run closely alongside
the rest of the nephron and eventually into the renal vein
The afferent arteriole supplies the capillaries of the glomerulus, which rejoin to form the
efferent arteriole.
Your notes
© 2026 Save My Exams, Ltd. Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com 16
