 electronegativity - polar bonds in organic compounds ELECTRONEGATIVITY This page deals with electronegativity in an organic chemistry context. If you want a wider view of electronegativity, there is a link at the bottom of the page. What is electronegativity? Electronegativity is a measure of the tendency of an atom to attract a bonding pair of electrons. The Pauling scale is the most commonly used. Fluorine (the most electronegative element) is given a value of 4.0, and values range down to caesium and francium which are the least electronegative at 0.7. What happens if two atoms of equal electronegativity bond together? The most obvious example of this is the bond between two carbon atoms. Both atoms will attract the bonding pair to exactly the same extent. That means that on average the electron pair will be found half way between the two nuclei, and you could draw a picture of the bond like this: It is important to realise that this is an average picture. The electrons are actually in a sigma orbital, and are moving constantly within that orbital. Help! &nbsp; A sigma orbital is a molecular orbital formed by end-to-end overlap between two atomic orbitals. If you aren't happy about this, read the articles on orbitals and the bonding in methane and ethane. The carbon-fluorine bond Fluorine is much more electronegative than carbon. The actual values on the Pauling scale are carbon 2.5 fluorine 4.0 That means that fluorine attracts the bonding pair much more strongly than carbon does. The bond - on average - will look like this: Why is fluorine more electronegative than carbon? A simple dots-and-crosses diagram of a C-F bond is perfectly adequate to explain it. The bonding pair is in the second energy level of both carbon and fluorine, so in the absence of any other effect, the distance of the pair from both nuclei would be the same. The electron pair is shielded from the full force of both nuclei by the 1s electrons - again there is nothing to pull it closer to one atom than the other. BUT, the fluorine nucleus has 9 protons whereas the carbon nucleus has only 6. Allowing for the shielding effect of the 1s electrons, the bonding pair feels a net pull of about 4+ from the carbon, but about 7+ from the fluorine. It is this extra nuclear charge which pulls the bonding pair (on average) closer to the fluorine than the carbon. Help! &nbsp; You have to imagine what the bonding pair "sees" if it looks in towards the nucleus. In the carbon case, it sees 6 positive protons, and 2 negative electrons. That means that there will be a net pull from the carbon of about 4+. The shielding wouldn't actually be quite as high as 2-, because the 1s electrons spend some of their time on the far side of the carbon nucleus - and so aren't always between the bonding pair and the nucleus. Incidentally, thinking about electrons looking towards the nucleus may be helpful in picturing what is going on, but avoid using terms like this in exams. The carbon-chlorine bond The
