Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Coefficient of Friction (Harder
Problems)
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Coefficient of friction
(equilibrium)
Help me understand
How do I model friction when a
body is in equilibrium?
When a body is in static equilibrium under the action of a
number of forces, including friction, the value of friction
will be less than or equal to the value of μR
When the value of friction is equal to μR, the body is in
limiting equilibrium and is on the point of moving
When a body is stationary on an inclined plane then it is
either in equilibrium or in limiting equilibrium, we cannot
assume that F = μR
How do I model friction when a
body is moving?
Stuck on something?
When a body is moving under the action of a number of
forces, including friction, the value of friction will be equal Ask questions and get help with
to the value of μR exactly what you're revising.
Got it

---

Worked Example
A wooden block of mass m is stationary on a plane inclined at
25o above the horizontal.
The coefficient of friction between the block and the plane is
μ. Find the least possible value of μ.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Always draw a force diagram and label it clearly.
Look out for key vocabulary such as rough, smooth,
equilibrium, on the point of moving and limiting
equilibrium and know how to use each.
Did this video help you? Yes No
Coefficient of friction
(connected particles)

---

How do I model friction for
connected particles?
When two particles are connected by means of a light,
inextensible string, friction will act only on any particle that
is resting on a rough surface
On an inclined slope, friction will act in the direction
opposite to the direction the particle is moving in or on the
point of moving in
The direction they will move in depends on both the
weight of the particles and the angles of the slopes they
are resting on
Compare the components of the weight in the
direction of the motion the particles will move in
The particle with the heavier component will move
down the slope
Worked Example
Two particles A and B, of identical mass, are connected by
means of a light inextensible string. Particle A is held
motionless on a rough fixed plane inclined at 30o to the
horizontal.
Particle B is resting on a rough fixed plane inclined at 60o to
the horizontal. The string passes over a smooth light pulley
fixed at the top of the two planes as shown in the diagram
below.
Answer:
Given that the coefficient of friction between particle A and
the plane is 0.2 and that the particles are in limiting
equilibrium, show that particle A is on the point of moving
down the slope and find the value of the coefficient of friction
between particle B and the plane.

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Be careful not to assume that the system will move in the
direction of the heavier particle, remember to consider
the angle too. Make sure your diagram is clear enough to
work with, sometimes there can be a lot of information on
the diagram.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them

---

Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

---

Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.