Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Equilibrium in 2D
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Paul
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Equilibrium in 2D Help me understand
How do I model particles in two
dimensions?
In twodimensions, a particle may be considered as
existing and being able to move around two-dimensional
space rather than in a single straight line (1D)
This 2D space is called a plane – so you may see the
0×y plane mentioned
The directions of the two dimensions are chosen so that
they are perpendicular to each other
The two directions are usually
horizontal and vertical, or
parallel and perpendicular to an inclined plane
What is the resultant force and an
unbalanced force in 2D?
The resultantforce in 2D is the sumofforces acting on a
Stuck on something?
particle but this will now need to be considered in two
parts – one for each direction Ask questions and get help with
An unbalancedforce is a force acting on a particle where exactly what you're revising.
one or both parts are not cancelled by another force
acting in the opposite direction Got it
So a non-zero resultant force will be non-zero in at least
one of the two dimensions, is therefore unbalanced and
the particle will accelerate

---

What does equilibrium in 2D mean?
In two dimensions a particle is in equilibrium if the
resultantforce acting on it is zero
For example, if the two dimensions involved are the
horizontal and vertical directions, a particle will be in
equilibrium if any forces acting left are balanced by
any forces acting rightand any forces acting up are
balanced by any forces acting down
When a particle has several forces (at least 3 – have a think
as to why!) acting on it – and it is in equilibrium – the forces
can be drawn “nose-to-tail” such that they form a polygon
Worked Example
A particle of mass 2 kg is suspended in the air by three strings,
one vertical and two horizontal. The particle is in equilibrium
and the magnitudes of the tensions in the strings are
illustrated in the diagram below.
(a) Write down the resultant forces acting on the particle in
both the horizontal and vertical directions.
Answer:
(b) Find the value of F.

---

Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
F is often used for resultantforce in equations.
net
Sketching diagrams, or adding to any given in a question,
can help you to understand a problem and pick up some
marks.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard

---

Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.