Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Equilibrium in 1D
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Paul
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Equilibrium in 1D
What is Newton’s first law of
motion?
An object at rest will stay at rest, and an object moving Help me understand
with constant velocitywill continue to move with constant
velocity, unless an unbalanced force acts on the object.
What is the resultant force and an
unbalanced force?
The resultantforce is the sumofforces acting on a
particle – consider it as a singleforce that achieves the
sameresult as all the forces combined
An unbalancedforce is a force acting on a particle that is
not cancelled by another force acting in the opposite
direction
So a non-zero resultant force will be unbalanced (hence
the wording in Newton’s First Law of Motion) and the
particle will accelerate Stuck on something?
What does equilibrium mean? Ask questions and get help with
exactly what you're revising.
A particle is in equilibrium if the resultantforce acting on
it is zero Got it
In other words when the sumoftheforces acting on a
particle is zero

---

For example, in the horizontal direction, any forces
acting to move the particle to the left will be
balanced by any forces acting to move the particle to
the right.
There does not need to be the same number of forces
in both directions – two forces could be acting to
move the particle to the left but are cancelled out by
only one force acting to move the particle to the right.
Worked Example
A rectangular shop sign, of mass (4× — 8) kg is held in
equilibrium by two light inextensible strings as shown in the
diagram below. The tensions in the two strings are (20x + 9) N
and (10x + 11) N.
The sign is modelled as a particle.
Taking the acceleration due to gravity (g) as 10 m s-2, find the
value of x.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks

---

It is unlikely you will get an exam question that only deals
with one dimension at AS and A level. However two-
dimensional problems can often be broken down into
two one-dimensional problems so the principles in this
note are important to understand.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths

---

Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.