Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
F = ma
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Paul
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
F = ma
What is Newton’s first law of
motion?
An object at rest will stay at rest, and an object moving
with constant velocity will continue to move with constant
velocity, unless an unbalanced force acts on the object
This law is explored more in 3.1.1 Equilibrium in 1D and
3.1.2 Equilibrium in 2D but has been included here for
completeness
Help me understand
What is Newton’s second law of
motion (N2L)?
The resultantforce (F ) acting on a body is equal to the
net
product of the mass of the body and its acceleration
F = ma
F is the resultant force (N)
m is the mass (kg)
a is the acceleration (m s-2) Stuck on something?
This will probably be the most familiar of Newton’s Laws of Ask questions and get help with
Motion as it has an equation (F = ma) that you will use exactly what you're revising.
frequently in mechanics problems.
Got it
What is Newton’s third law of
motion?

---

For two bodies, the force exerted on the second by the
first is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the
force exerted on the first body by the second
This is sometimes loosely referred to as “for every action
there is an opposite and equal reaction”
When do I use F = ma?
Use it to setup and solve equations when motion is
involved
Some related equations may come from the constant
accelerationequations (‘suvat’) butF= mais needed
when force(s) and mass are mentioned or involved
(neither force nor mass are involved in the ‘suvat’
equations)
If not asked directly in a question it will be implied by the
information given – motion and acceleration will be
involved and the mass of the particle will be relevant too
How do I solve problems using F =
ma and suvat equations?
F= ma can be used in conjunction with the ‘suvat’
equations – the linking connection is acceleration (a)
‘suvat’ only questions will not involve mass or (resultant)
force
Step 1. Draw a diagram and label all forces acting on the
particle(s)
label the positive direction and any other useful
information
If a diagram is given, add anything missing to it
Step 2. Use N2L, F = ma , or an appropriate ‘suvat’
equation.
If there is more than one particle involved you may
have to do this for each
Step 3. Solve the equation
In harder problems simultaneous equations may arise.
How do I deal with forces acting in
different directions on a moving
particle?
At AS level, if forces are acting in different directions,
those directions will be perpendicular to one another
Thus nearly all questions at AS level involve forces
acting horizontally (x-direction) and/or vertically (y-
direction)
In such cases we apply N2L (F = ma) and ‘suvat’ equations
separately to both directions

---

How do I use F = ma in problems
involving weight?
Weight is a force
W = mg N where g m s-2 is the acceleration due to
gravity
Weight always acts verticallydownwards (towards
earth)
If upwards is the positivedirection (and assuming no
other vertical forces are involved) then acceleration
would be negative, a = -9.8 m s-2
Worked Example
A train engine of mass 5 tonnes is moving along a straight
track with constant acceleration. In an eight second period, it
covers a distance of 250 m at which point it has velocity 35 m
s-1
(a) Find the acceleration of the train engine.
Answer:
(b) Find the resultant force acting on the train engine.
Answer:

---

(c) Given that the (only) driving force is 6250 N, find the total
of any resistive forces acting on the train engine.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Sketching, or adding to given, diagrams can help to
understand problems and can help you decide which
direction to take as positive.
Remember that F (in N2L) is the resultant force,
sometimes seen as F - be careful not to get it muddled
net
with any other forces that are, or could be, denoted by F.
To avoid confusion, use quote marks around “F = ma" to
show that the quoted F, m do not necessarily correspond
to a mentioned in the question.
Depending on which direction is taken as positive, the
resultant force, F N , may be negative and/or
acceleration, a m s-2, may be negative (this is particularly
relevant for vertical motion)
Write a list of the quantities that are given in a question
and another list of those you are asked to find. This will
help you decide which equation(s) to use.
A third list of the quantities you are not concerned can
help as these may be used to find intermediate results.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them

---

Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

---

Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.