Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
F = ma & Vector Notation
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Paul
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
F = ma & vector notation
How is F = ma used with vectors?
The resultantforce (F) and acceleration (a) are vectors
For forces and motion in twodimensions,F N and a m s-2
will be made up of two components – a horizontal (x-)
component and a vertical (y-) component
Displacement, velocity and weightare also vector
quantities Help me understand
Time and mass are scalar quantities
Vectors appear in bold(non-italic) font in textbooks, on
exam papers, etc(i.e. F, a) but in handwriting should be
underlined (i.e. F, a)
What notation is used for forces as
vectors?
All vectors are written either as columnvectors or in i-j
format
As a column vector F = ma would look like Stuck on something?
⎛ ⎜F ⎞ ⎟ ⎛ ⎜a ⎞ ⎟ Ask questions and get help with
⎜ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ x ⎟ ⎟ ⎟ ⎟ =m ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ x ⎟ ⎟ ⎟ ⎟ exactly what you're revising.
F a
⎝ y ⎠ ⎝ y ⎠
Got it
In i-j notation F = ma would look like
F i+F j=m(a i+a j)
x y x y

---

When do I use F= ma in vector form?
If vectors/2D are being used this will be clear from the
information given in the question – any vector quantities
will be given as a columnvector or written in i-jnotation
Remember F = mais used when motion is involved –
equations may come from ‘suvat’ (if the acceleration is
constant), or using N2L directly; look for (resultant) force,
mass and acceleration being involved
Use F= ma(N2L in 1D) or an appropriate ‘suvat’ (in 1D)
equation to set up and solve separate equations for both
the horizontal ( x-) and vertical (y -) components.
How is weight represented as a
vector?
Weight is a force, so it is a vector quantity
W = mg N where g m s-2is the acceleration due to
gravity
Weight always acts verticallydownwards so it only acts in
the j-direction
W=−mgjN (g≈ 9.8 m s-2 )
Treating the two dimensions separately means weight
only needs to be considered when looking at the vertical
(y -) direction
Most 2D/vector problems are based on a bird’s-eye view
– the two dimensions being left/right and
forwards/backwards, so the up/down (third) dimension
where weight would apply, is often not involved
A Force, F, acting on a snooker ball
How do I apply F = ma in problems
involving vectors?
Step 1. If necessary, draw a diagram and label all forces
acting on the particle(s)
label the i and j directions and any other useful
information.
If a diagram is given, add any missing information to it.
Step 2. Taking each dimension/component at a time use F
= ma
If there is more than one particle involved you may
have to do this for each

---

Step 3. Solve the equations for each component and put
the final answers back into vector notation
In some harder problems simultaneous equations
may arise
Worked Example
A yacht of mass 3.5 tonnes is sailing with constant
acceleration (0.8i + 0.3j) ms-2.
The force from the engine of the yacht is D N. The yacht
experiences a force from water resistance of (—14i — 19j) N.
Find the force D N acting on the yacht.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
If not given in the question, draw a diagram; label all
forces and the positive direction for both components.
Add to a diagram if given one, do not assume it is
complete.
Write a list of the quantities that are given in a question
and another list of those you are asked to find. This will
help you decide which equation(s) to use.
A third list of the quantities you are not concerned with
can help as these may be used to find intermediate
results.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions

---

Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support

---

© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.