Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Force Diagrams
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Paul
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Force diagrams
Why do we need force diagrams?
Forcediagrams are used to help understand a given
scenario and show which forces are acting on which
particles and in which direction they are acting
Help me understand
In diagrams an arrow is used to represent a force acting
on a particle which shows the direction in which the force
is acting
The magnitudeof the force is normally written next to its
arrow
Stuck on something?
Ask questions and get help with
exactly what you're revising.
What types of forces could be
Got it
involved?

---

Specific types of force encountered (which may not be
mentioned in the question nor labelled on a given
diagram) are: weight (W N), tension (T N), thrust (T N),
friction (F N) and normalreaction (R N)
Remember that the diagram is drawn to help understand
the scenario - cars, blocks, etc are modelled as particles
occupying a singlepoint in space and so all forces acting
on the car, block, etc act at that same singlepoint
The main forces that you will see are:
tension (a “pulling” force) acts away from a particle,
thrust (a “pushing” force) acts towards it
weight is W = mg where m kg is the mass of the
particle and g is the acceleration due to gravity –
usually g = 9.8 m s-2
friction acts parallel to the surface in the opposite
direction to motion
the normalreaction acts perpendicular to the
surface (and friction)
Worked Example
The diagram below shows a block, of weight 52 N, at rest on a
rough plane that is inclined at θ° to the horizontal. The block is
connected to a mass, m kg, via a light inextensible string that
passes over a smooth pulley. The particle hangs at rest
vertically below the pulley.
Add all forces (known and unknown) to the diagram that are
acting on the block and the mass. Also indicate the direction
of acceleration of any subsequent motion. (You may assume
the block is heavier than the mass and so any subsequent
motion would see the block slide down the plane.)
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Always draw a force diagram if appropriate.
If a diagram is already given then add to it as you progress
through the question.
If a diagram is too small or it gets too complicated then
draw a new diagram.
You may be able to manage with just drawing the section
of the diagram you are dealing with in any particular
question part.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics

---

Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.