Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Forces in 2D & Vector Notation
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Paul
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Forces in 2D & vector
notation
How are forces and vectors
related?
Forces are vectors – they have magnitude and direction.
TheMagnitudeof a force is measured in Newtons and the
direction of a force is an angle, usually measured in
degrees, anti-clockwise from the horizontal Help me understand
There are other ways to talk about direction – in particular
Cartesiancoordinates(x, y) are used to describe the
position of a point in two-dimensional space (plane),
relative to a fixed origin O.
You may see questions start with a sentence along the
lines of “Relative to the frame of reference Oxy …” – this
means the two-dimensional space (plane) and distances
within it will be based on horizontal (x) and vertical (y)
components relative to the origin O.
What is vector notation? Stuck on something?
Ask questions and get help with
Bothcolumn vectors and i, j notation can be used for
exactly what you're revising.
calculating resultant vectors
In both cases, a vector (force) is written with its two Got it
components separated so the magnitude and direction
of the vector are not directly known.

---

What notation is used for
magnitude and direction?
The magnitude of the force F N would be denoted by |F| N
or F N – notice the use of bold and italics in particular
Direction is an angle, usually measured in degrees anti-
clockwise from the horizontal, θ° is usually used
How do I find the magnitude and
direction of a force from its
components?
For a force F = xi + yj N to find
its magnitude,|F| N or F N ,use Pythagoras’ theorem
its direction (as an angle), use a diagram and
trigonometry
If either (or both) components are negative then still use a
diagram and trigonometry but
treat x and y as positive (so |x| and |y| strictly
speaking)
the angle found may need adjusting depending on
where, and which way, the direction is being
measured from
e.g. Find the direction at which the force F = (-8i - 6j)
N, giving your answer as an angle measured in
degrees anti-clockwise from the positive horizontal
direction
What does equilibrium mean with
vectors?
In two dimensions a particle is in equilibrium if the
resultantforce acting on it in both directions is zero
For columnvectors, a resultantforce of zero would
⎛ ⎜0⎞
⎟
look like ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟
⎝0⎠
For vectors in i-jnotation, a resultantforce of zero
would look like (0i + 0j) N

---

Both forms may be written as 0 N (called ‘the zero
vector’)
Worked Example
Two forces, (3i + 8j) N and (—5i — 11j) N act on a particle.
(i) Find the resultant force.
(ii) Find the magnitude of the resultant force and its direction
as an angle measured anti-clockwise from the i-direction.
(iii) A third force is applied to the particle such that it is
brought into equilibrium. Find the third force, giving your
answer in the form (xi+yj)N
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Ideally you should stick to the i-,j- vector notation used in
a question but if you prefer one over the other you can
use a mixture within the same question. Just be careful
your final answer is in the correct format if requested.
Draw diagrams – including ‘mini’-diagrams of individual
forces/vectors – this can help in understanding a problem
and being accurate.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions

---

Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support

---

© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.