Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Resolving Forces & Inclined
Planes
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Resolving forces
If a single force is applied at an angle to the direction of
motion it will need to be resolved into components of the
force that act perpendicular to each other.
Why resolve a force acting at an
angle?
Resolving a force acting at an angle often helps to simplify
a problem
The components of a force parallel and perpendicular to
the line of motion allows different types of problems to be
solved
The parallel component of a force acting directly on a
particle will be the component that causes an effect
on the particle
The perpendicular component of a force acting
directly on a particle will be the component that has
no effect on the particle Stuck on something?
Finding the horizontal and vertical components of a force Ask questions and get help with
can help solve problems acting in the horizontal plane exactly what you're revising.
The two components of the force will have the same
Got it
combined effect as the original force

---

How do I resolve a force acting at an
angle?
Use trigonometry to resolve a force acting at an angle
Draw a vector triangle of forces by decomposing the
force into its horizontal and vertical components
The original force will be the hypotenuse of the triangle
and the two components will make up the opposite and
adjacent sides
Help me understand
How do I find the resultant force of
two forces acting at different
angles?
Force is a vector quantity, so finding the resultant of two
or more forces is the same as finding the resultant of two
or more vectors
It is possible to use geometry to find the resultant force
without decomposing the forces into their horizontal and
vertical components
Use the triangle law for vector addition to calculate the
magnitude and direction of a resultant force
You will need to use trigonometry to find the missing side
or angle in the triangle.

---

Worked Example
A child is pulling a box of mass 2 kg along a smooth horizontal
surface using a force of 10 N at an angle of 30o to the
horizontal, as shown in the diagram below.
(i) Find the vertical and horizontal components of the 10 N
force.
(ii) Explain why the resultant force acting to move the box is 5
3 N.
(iii) Work out the acceleration of the box.
(iv) Calculate the magnitude of the normal reaction between
the box and the floor.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Always draw a diagram and decompose any angled
forces into their horizontal and vertical components.
Make sure you are confident with basic trigonometry and
angle properties.
Did this video help you? Yes No
Inclined planes

---

How do I use F = ma on an inclined
plane?
Problems involving inclined planes will always be acting
along the line of greatest slope of the plane
The line of greatest slope is the most direct route with
which it is possible to move from the bottom to the
top of the plane
A force said to be acting in the same vertical plane as
the line of greatest slope will be acting in the same
plane as this most direct route
It is usually easier to resolve parallel and perpendicular to
the plane
The normal reaction force always acts perpendicular to
the plane and will not need to be resolved
Weight (mg) always acts vertically downwards and so it is
easier to use when resolved into components
perpendicular and parallel to the plane
When an object is moving up or down the inclined plane, it
has acceleration only in the parallel direction
The perpendicular forces will be equal in the positive
and negative directions
Newton’s Second Law (F = ma) can be used in the
parallel direction to determine acceleration or
missing forces
On an inclined plane friction will always act in the opposite
direction to the direction the object is moving in or on the
point of moving in
Worked Example
A box of mass 5 kg is being pushed up a smooth ramp inclined
at 10o to the horizontal by a force of 12 N.
(i) Find the magnitude of the reaction force acting on the box.
(ii) Find the acceleration of the box up the slope.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Use a triangle of components on your force diagrams to
help you work out the components of the force but be
careful not to count the components as two separate
forces. Make sure you are confident with angle properties
and always check you are using the correct angle
between the force and the direction you are resolving in.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next

---

Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.