Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Hypothesis Testing for the
Population Proportion of a
Binomial Distribution
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Binomial hypothesis testing
How do I carry out a hypothesis test
using a binomial distribution?
The population parameter being tested will be the
probability, p in a binomial distribution B(n , p)
A hypothesis test is used when the assumed probability is
questioned
The null hypothesis, H and alternative hypothesis, H will
0 1
always be given in terms of p
Make sure you clearly define p before writing the
hypotheses
The null hypothesis will always be H : p = ... Help me understand
0
The alternative hypothesis will depend on if it is a one-
tailed or two-tailed test
A one-tailed test would test to see if the value of p
has either increased or decreased Stuck on something?
The alternative hypothesis, H will be H : p > ...
1 1 Ask questions and get help with
or H : p < ...
1 exactly what you're revising.
A two-tailed test would test to see if the value of p
Got it
has changed
The alternative hypothesis, H will be H : p ≠ ...
1 1

---

To carry out a hypothesis test with the binomial
distribution, the test statistic will be the number of
successes in a defined number of trials
When defining the test statistic, remember that the value
of p is being tested, so this should be written as p in the
original definition, followed by the null hypothesis stating
the assumed value of p
The binomial distribution will be used to calculate the
probability of the test statistic taking the observed value
or a more extreme value
The hypothesis test can be carried out by
either calculating the probability of the test statistic
taking the observed or a more extreme value (p –
value) and comparing this with the significance level
or by finding the critical region and seeing whether
the observed value of the test statistic lies within it
Finding the critical region can be more useful for
considering more than one observed value or for
further testing
How do I find the critical value?
The critical value will be the first value to fall within the
critical region
The binomial distribution is a discrete distributionso
the probability of the observed value being within the
critical region, given a true null hypothesis may be less
than the significance level
This is the actual significance level and is the
probability of incorrectly rejecting the null hypothesis
For a one-tailed test use the tables of the binomial
distribution or your calculator to find the first value for
which the probability of that or a more extreme value is
less than the given significance level
Check that the next value would cause this probability
to be greater than the significance level
For H 1 : p < ...if P(X≤c)≤α% and P(X≤c+1)>α%
then c is the critical value
For H 1 : p > ... if P(X≥c)≤α% and P(X≥c−1)>α%
then c is the critical value
For a two-tailed test you will need to find both critical
values, one at each end of the distribution
Use the tables of the binomial distribution or your
calculator to find the first value for which the
probability of that or a more extreme value is less
than half of the given significance level in both the
upper and lower tails
Often one of the critical regions will be much bigger
than the other
How do I lay out the hypothesis
test?
Step 1. Define the probability, p
Step 2. Write the null and alternative hypotheses clearly
using the form
H : p = ...
0
H : p = ...
1
Step 3. Define the test statistic, usually X∼B(n,p) where n
is a defined number of trials and p is the population

---

parameter to be tested
Step 4. Calculate either the critical value(s) or the p –
value for the test
Step 5. Compare the observed value of the test statistic
with the critical value(s) or the p - value with the
significance level
Step 6. Decide whether there is enough evidence to
reject H or whether it has to be accepted
0
Step 7.Write a conclusion in context
Worked Example
Jacques, a breadmaker, claims that more than 80% of people
that shop in a particular supermarket buy his brand of bread.
Jacques takes a random sample of 100 customers that have
purchased bread and asks them which brand of bread they
have purchased. He records that 86 of them had purchased
his brand of bread. Test, at the 10% level of significance,
whether Jacques’ claim is justified.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Make sure you are careful with the inequalities when
finding critical values from the binomial tables or from

---

your calculator.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature

---

Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.