Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Hypothesis Testing for the
Population Mean of a Normal
Distribution
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 26 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Normal hypothesis testing
How do I do a hypothesis test with a
normal distribution?
The population parameter being tested will be the
population mean, in a normally distributed random
variable N(μ,σ2)
The population mean is tested by looking at the mean
of a sample taken from the population
The sample mean is denoted ⎯ x ⎯
For a random variable X∼N(μ,σ2) the distribution of
⎯⎯ σ2
the sample mean would be X∼N(μ, )
n
A hypothesis test is used when the value of the assumed
Help me understand
population mean is questioned
The null hypothesis, H 0 and alternative hypothesis, H 1 will Stuck on something?
always be given in terms of µ
Ask questions and get help with
Make sure you clearly define µ before writing the
exactly what you're revising.
hypotheses, if it has not been defined in the question
The null hypothesis will always be H : µ = ...
0 Got it
The alternative hypothesis will depend on if it is a one-
tailed or two-tailed test
A one-tailed test would test to see if the value of µ
has either increased or decreased

---

The alternative hypothesis, H will be H : µ > ...
1 1
or H : µ < ...
1
A two-tailed test would test to see if the value of µ has
changed
The alternative hypothesis, H will be H : µ ≠ ..
1 1
To carry out a hypothesis test with the normal distribution,
⎯⎯⎯
the test statistic will be the sample mean, X
Remember that the variance of the sample mean
distribution will be the variance of the population
distribution divided by n
the mean of the sample mean distribution will be the
same as the mean of the population distribution
The normal distribution will be used to calculate the
probability of the observed value of the test statistic
taking the observed value or a more extreme value
The hypothesis test can be carried out by
either calculating the probability of the test statistic
taking the observed or a more extreme value (p –
value) and comparing this with the significance level
or by finding the critical region and seeing whether
the observed value of the test statistic lies within it
Finding the critical region can be more useful for
considering more than one observed value or for
further testing
How do I find the critical value?
The critical value(s) will be the boundary of the critical
region
The probability of the observed value being within the
critical region, given a true null hypothesis will be the
same as the significance level
For an α% significance level:
In a one-tailed test the critical region will consist of α
% in the tail that is being tested for
In a two-tailed test the critical region will consist of
α
% in each tail
2
To find the critical value(s) find the distribution of the
sample means, assuming H is true, and use the inverse
0
normal function on your calculator
For a two-tailed test you will need to find both critical
values, one at each end of the distribution
How can I use the standard normal
distribution Z to perform a
hypothesis test?
You could use the standard normal distribution:
⎯⎯
x−μ
Find the z-value for your sample mean using z=
σ
n
Find the critical value(s) for the Z distribution using the
percentage points table
If the z-value is further away from 0 than the critical
value then reject H
0
You could use the standard normal distribution as an
alternative method for finding the critical value(s) is to use
the standard normal distribution:

---

Step 1. Find the distribution of the sample means,
assuming H is true
0
⎯
x−μ
Step 2. Use the coding Z= to standardise to Z
σ
n
Step 3. Use percentage points table to find the z -
value for which the probability of Z being equal to or
more extreme than the value is equal to the
significance level
Step 4. Equate this value to your expression found in
step 2
Step 5. Solve to find the corresponding value of ⎯ x ⎯
If using this method for a two-tailed test be aware of the
following:
The symmetry of the normal distribution means that
the z - values will have the same absolute value
You can solve the equation for both the positive and
negative z – value to find the two critical values
Check that the two critical values are the same
distance from the mean
How do I lay out the hypothesis
test?
Following these steps will help when carrying out a
hypothesis test for the mean of a normal distribution:
Step 1. Define the distribution of the population mean
usually X∼N(μ,σ2)
Step 2. Write the null and alternative hypotheses clearly
using the form
H 0 : μ = ...
H 1 : μ ... ...
Step 3. Assuming the null hypothesis to be true, define
⎯⎯ σ2
the test statistic, usually X∼N(μ, )
n
Step 4. Calculate either the critical value(s) or the p –
value (probability of the observed value)for the test
Step 5. Compare the observed value of the test statistic
with the critical value(s) or the p - value with the
significance level
Step 6. Decide whether there is enough evidence to
reject H or whether it has to be accepted
0
Step 7. Write a conclusion in context
Alternatively, if you have used the standard normal
distribution method then in steps 4 and 5 you could
compare the z – value corresponding to the observed
value with the z – value corresponding to the critical value
Worked Example
The time, X minutes, that it takes Amelea to complete a
1000−piece puzzle can be modelled using X∼N(204,81).
Amelea gets prescribed a new pair of glasses and claims that
the time it takes her to complete a 1000−piece puzzle has
decreased. Wearing her new glasses, Amelea completes 12
separate 1000−piece puzzle and calculates her mean time on
these puzzles to be 201 minutes. Use these 12 puzzles as a

---

sample to test, at the 5% level of significance, whether there
is evidence to support Amelea’s claim. You may assume the
variance is unchanged.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Use a diagram to help, especially if looking for the critical
value and comparing this with an observed value of a test
statistic
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself

---

Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.