Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Acceleration due to Gravity
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Dan Finlay
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Acceleration due to gravity
What is acceleration due to gravity?
Help me understand
If motion is vertical and no other forces are acting on a
particle, the acceleration of the particle will be due to
gravity
Acceleration due to gravity is denoted by the letter g
The value for gravity on Earth varies depending on
Stuck on something?
location (the average value is 9.80665)
Take g = 9.8 m s-2 unless told otherwise Ask questions and get help with
It is often easier to leave working in terms of g as it exactly what you're revising.
sometimes cancels out or it can be calculated at the
end Got it
Some questions may ask for the answer to be left in
terms of g

---

Gravity will always act in the downwards direction
towards the earth
If you decide upwards is the positive direction, then a
= -g
If you decide downwards is the positive direction
then a = g
It is important to be clear about which direction you
have decided is positive
What is vertical displacement and
vertical distance?
There is a difference between displacement and distance
It is more pronounced in vertical motion problems
Particles typically travel in both directions (up and
down)
What goes up must come down!
Displacement, s, is a vector
It is the position of a particle (at time t) relative to its
startingposition
It only takes into account where the particle started
and ended
If a particle has returned to its starting position then
its displacement will be zero
Distance could be …
… the distance from the start
in which case distance is the magnitude of
displacement
… the distance travelled
… the distance from the origin
the origin is not necessarily the starting position
… the distance from another particle
Read the question carefully to be clear about which of
these you are finding
How do I solve freefall questions
using suvat equations?
Virtually the same as suvat in 1D for horizontal motion
Follow the same steps and be careful with negatives
You might have to spot that gravity is the acceleration by
seeing the phrases:
"falling freely"
"projected"
"thrown/dropped"
A diagram is important to help make clear …
… the positive direction of motion
… the way in which acceleration relates to the positive
direction
… differences between displacement and distance
Particles moving upwards will reach a maximumheight
At the maximum height, velocity is instantaneously
zero, v = 0
If you use the value 9.8 for g then your final answer must
be written as a decimal to 2 or 3significant figures

---

You may lose marks if you leave your answer as more
than 3 significant figures
Worked Example
A toy rocket is projected vertically upwards from ground level
with initial speed 18 m s-1
(a) Find the maximum height the toy rocket reaches.
Answer:
(b) Find the time taken from the instant the toy rocket is
projected to the instant it returns to the ground.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
If you are asked to find how long it takes before a particle
returns to the ground, you can simply use suvat with
s = 0 if the particle started from the ground
s = -h if the particle started a height of h m above the
ground
A common mistake is thinking that the speed of the
object when it hits the ground is zero. This is incorrect! The
object will be travelling with a speed at the instant it hits
the ground. It is the impact that causes the speed to go to
zero. For an object travelling vertically under gravity, the
only time the speed is zero is when it is at its maximum
height.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out

---

Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.