Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Ladders & Hinges
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Dan Finlay
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Moments (ladder
problems)
How do I model a ladder?
We can model the ladder as a rod
There will be two (likely different) reaction forces
a vertical reaction force R between the bottom of
f
the ladder and the floor
a perpendicular reaction between the ladder and the
surface that it is leaning on
if it is a peg then the reaction force R will be
p
perpendicular to the peg
if it is a vertical wall then the reaction force R
w Help me understand
will be horizontal
There could be frictional forces keeping the ladder in
equilibrium
The frictional force on the floor F will act horizontally
f
towards the wall
The frictional force on a vertical wall will act vertically
Stuck on something?
upwards
The coefficients of friction between the ladder and Ask questions and get help with
the floor/wall might be different exactly what you're revising.
Got it

---

How do I solve problems involving
ladders?
Include the weight of the ladder
If it is modelled as being uniform then the weight will
act at the midpoint of the ladder
Include any extra weights for any additional objects on
the ladder such as a person standing on it
Form two equations using the horizontal forces and the
vertical forces
If the coefficient of friction is involved then:
use F ≤ µRif the ladder is in equilibrium
if the ladder is said to be on the point of slipping it is in
limiting equilibrium and so use F = µR
Form moment equations
Useful pivots include the points of contact between
the ladder and the floor, wall or peg
You will have to use right-angled trigonometry to find
the perpendicular distances
Solve the equations to find any unknown distances,
angles, masses or force
Worked Example
A uniform ladder of mass 15 kg and length 10 m rests with one
end at point A on a rough vertical wall and the other end at
point B on a rough horizontal ground. The ladder is in
equilibrium at an angle of 30o to the horizontal. The magnitude
of the frictional force at the wall is 50 N. Find
(i) the magnitude of the normal reaction force at the wall,
(ii) the magnitude of the normal reaction force at the ground,
(iii) the magnitude of the frictional force at the ground.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
If the ladder is resting on the peg then it might be a good
idea to resolve forces parallel and perpendicular to the
ladder instead of horizontal and vertical. Your answer will
be the same, it just depends on what you find easier.
Did this video help you? Yes No
Moments (hinges)
How do I solve problems involving
hinges?

---

If one end of a rod is hinged to a surface then that end is
fixed to that point but the rod is free to rotate about that
point
There will be a resultant force acting on the rod from the
hinge
This force will not be perpendicular to the surface – it
will be acting at an angle
Taking moments about the hinge is a good way to avoid
including the force from the hinge
If you are asked to find the magnitude and direction of
the force from the hinge:
Step 1: Find the horizontal and vertical components of
the force
Step 2: Find the magnitude by using Pythagoras
Step 3: Find the direction by using right-angled
trigonometry
There are two common ways a rod will be held horizontally
at a wall:
The rod could be without a hinge so that there is
contact with the wall which means there is a normal
reaction force and a frictional force to stop the rod
sliding down the wall
The rod could be with a hinge so that there is a
resultant force from the hinge acting at an angle of α°
to the horizontal which stops the rod rotating about
the hinge
Splitting the resultant force from the hinge into
horizontal and vertical components makes both
scenarios mathematically similar
Worked Example
A non-uniform rod AB of weight 100 N and length 4 m is freely
hinged at A to a vertical wall. The rod is held in a horizontal
position by a light inextensible cable attached at B.
The other end of the cable is attached to the wall at point C
vertically above A. The angle ABC is 30° as shown in the
diagram below. The centre of mass of the rod is 1 m from B.

---

(a) Find the magnitude of the tension in the cable.
(b) Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant force
exerted on the rod by the hinge at A.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Try not to let hinges scare you! Just remember there will
be vertical and horizontal components. If you draw them
in the wrong direction (up instead of down or left instead
of right) then don’t panic, it just means your answer for
that direction will be a negative.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No

---

Previous
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.