Edexcel A Level Maths: Mechanics Revision Notes
Moments Diagrams
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Dan Finlay
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Moments diagrams
When an object is modelled as a particle we do not need to
Help me understand
consider the rotation of the object due to forces. When we
model an object as a rigid body then we need to consider the
rotation of the object.
What is a moment?
The moment of a force is the measure of its ability to
cause a body to rotate about a specific point (usually
called the pivot)
The units for moments are newton metres (N m)
A force can cause a body to rotate clockwise or anti-
clockwise
The moment of a force about a point is calculated by
multiplying the magnitude of the force by the
perpendicular distance from the line of action of the
force to the point
We can choose the positive direction to be
clockwise or anti-clockwise and the negative
direction is the opposite Stuck on something?
A zero moment will not cause a body to rotate
Ask questions and get help with
The moment of a force about a point is zero if the line of exactly what you're revising.
action of the force goes through the point
If the force is not acting perpendicular to the distance Got it
given you will need to use right-angled trigonometry to
find the perpendicular distance

---

How do I know if a moment is
clockwise or anti-clockwise?
A clockwise moment will cause a body to rotate in the
clockwise direction
To visualise this:
Imagine that the perpendicular line from the point to
the force is the radius of a circle
The direction of the force tells you which way the
circle goes round
What is the resultant moment?
The resultant moment is the sum of all the moments
acting on a body (both positive and negative)
To find the resultant moment:
Define the positive direction (clockwise or anti-
clockwise)
Add together all the moments in that direction
Subtract all the moments in the opposite direction
The overall value is the resultant moment
The sign of the resultant moment indicates which
direction the body will rotate
Positive will be the direction chosen as positive
Negative will be the opposite direction
Worked Example
Calculate the resultant moment about P of the forces
indicated in the following diagram.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Always define a positive direction as either clockwise or
anti-clockwise.
It is best to state the magnitude of a moment and write its
direction when giving a final answer.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself

---

Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.