Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Tree Diagrams
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Paul
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Tree diagrams
What is a tree diagram?
A treediagram is used to
show the (combined) outcomesof more than one
eventthat happen one after the other
help calculate probabilities when AND and/or OR’s
are involved
Treediagrams are mostly used when there are only two
mutuallyexclusiveoutcomes of interest
e.g. “Rolling a 6 on a die” and “Not rolling a 6 on a die”
More than three outcomes per event can be shown on a
tree diagram but they soon become difficult to draw and
so lose their effectiveness
Treediagrams are very helpful when probabilities for a
second event change depending on the first event
Help me understand
How do I draw and label a tree
diagram?
Stuck on something?
Ask questions and get help with
exactly what you're revising.
Got it

---

In the second experiment, P(B) may be different on the
top set of branches than the bottom set
this is because the top set of branches follow on from
event A but the bottom set of branches follow on
from event “not A”
e.g. This is most commonly seen in drawing one item
at random, not replacing it, then drawing another
Sometimes a second branch may not be needed
following a first event
e.g. In aiming to pass a test (experiment) the event
fail on the first attempt would require a second
attempt but the event pass on the first attempt would
not
How do I find probabilities from tree
diagrams?
Interpret questions in terms of AND and/or OR (See 1
Basic Probability)
Draw, or complete a given, tree diagram Determine any
missing probabilities; often using 1−P(A) and considering
if probabilities change depending on the outcome from
the 1st experiment
Write down the (final) outcome of the combined events
and work out their probabilities – these are AND
statements P(A AND B)=P(A)×P(B) (“Multiply
along branches”)
Do not simplify fractions yet – it’ll be easier to
calculate with them later
you can of course use your calculator
If more than one (final) outcome is required to answer a
question then add their probabilities – these are OR
statements
P(AB OR "notA""notB")=P(AB)+P("notA""notB")
(“Add outcomes”)
This applies since all the (final) outcomes are mutually
exclusive
Note that AB,"notA""notB" are implied AND
statements (for example AB means A and B)

---

When you are confident with tree diagrams you can just
pull out the (final) outcome(s) you need to answer a
question rather than routinely list all of them
Worked Example
A contestant on a game show has three attempts to hit a
target in a shooting game. They have a maximum of three
attempts to hit the target in order to win the star prize – a
speedboat. If they do not hit the target within three attempts,
they do not win anything.
The probability of them hitting the target first time is 0.2. With
each successive attempt the probability of them failing to hit
the target is halved.
Find the probability that a contestant wins the star prize of a
speedboat.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
It can be tricky to get a tree diagram looking neat and
clear first attempt – it can be worth drawing a rough one
first, especially if there are more than two outcomes or
more than two events; do keep an eye on the exam clock
though!
Always worth another mention – tree diagrams make
particularly frequent use of the result P(notA)=1−P(A)
Tree diagrams have built-in checks
the probabilities for each pair of branches should
add up to 1
the probabilities for each outcome of combined
events should add up to 1

---

Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects

---

Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.