Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Venn Diagrams
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Paul
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Venn diagrams
What is a Venn diagram?
A Venn diagram is a way to illustrate events from an
experiment and are particularly useful when there is an Help me understand
overlap (or lack of) between possible outcomes
A Venn diagram consists of
a rectangle representing the samplespace
a bubble (usually drawn as a circle/ellipse/oval) for
each event
Bubbles may or may not overlap depending on
which outcomes are shared between events
Bubble(s) is not a technical term but we like it!
How do I interpret a Venn diagram?
The rectangle is usually labelled with an S – as it represents
the samplespace (all possible outcomes from the
experiment)
It is often referred to as the Universal Set and is
commonly labelled with S,U,ξ (the Greek lower case Stuck on something?
letter Xi) or ℰ(Kunstler script font) There is no
Ask questions and get help with
standardised symbol used for this purpose
exactly what you're revising.
Bubbles are labelled with their event name (A, B, etc)
Got it
The numbers inside a Venn diagram (there should be one in
each region) will represent either a frequency or a
probability

---

In the case of probabilities being shown, all values
should total 1
What do the different regions mean
on a Venn diagram?
This will depend on how many events there are and how
the outcomes overlap
Venn diagrams show ‘AND’ and ‘OR’ statements easily
Venn diagrams also instantly show mutually exclusive
events
Independence can be deduced from the
probabilities involved
How do I find probabilities from
Venn diagrams?
Draw, or add to a given Venn diagram, filling in as many
values as possible from the information provided in the
question
It is usually helpful to work from the centre outwards
i.e. fill in intersections (overlaps) first

---

This is particularly crucial with Venn diagrams with
three events
the intersection of events A and B will include
the intersection of events A, B and C
a question would make it clear if a given
frequency or probability is only for events A and B
, and not C
Any frequencies or probabilitiesnotgiven may be able to
be calculated from those that are
Use the results from Basic Probability to deduce
missing frequencies or probabilities and answer
questions
P(notA)=1−P(A)
For independent events,
P(AandB)=P(A)×P(B)
For mutuallyexclusive events,
P(AorB)=P(A)+P(B)
Check a completed Venn diagram that the frequencies
sum to the total involved or that probabilitiessum to 1
Worked Example
40 people were surveyed regarding which games consoles
they owned.
8 people said they owned a Playstation 5 (P ) and an Xbox
Series X (X ); 11 people said they owned a Playstation 5 (P) and
a Nintendo Switch (N); 7 people said they owned an Xbox
Series X (X) and a Nintendo Switch (N).
4 people said they owned none of these consoles whilst 2
people said they owned all 3.
Of those people that owned only one games console, twice
as many owned a Nintendo Switch as a Playstation 5 and half
as many owned an Xbox Series X as a Playstation 5.
(a) Draw a complete Venn diagram to illustrate the information
given above.
(b) One of the 40 people is chosen at random. Find the
probability that this person
(i) owns all three consoles,
(ii) owns exactly two consoles,
(iii) doesn’t own a Playstation 5.
(c) Determine if the events X and N are independent.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Always draw the box in a Venn diagram; it represents all
possible outcomes of the experiment so is a crucial part
of the diagram, the bubbles merely represent the events
we are particularly interested in
In complicated problems it can be helpful to draw a “mini-
Venn” diagram for part of a question and shade/label the
regions of the diagram that are relevant to that part

---

Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects

---

Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.