Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Box Plots & Cumulative
Frequency
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Box plots
What is a box plot?
A box plot is a graph that clearly shows key statistics from Help me understand
a data set
It shows the median, quartiles, minimum and
maximum values and outliers
It does not show any other individual data items
The middle 50% of the data will be represented by the box
section of the graph and the lower and upper 25% of the
data will be represented by each of the whiskers
Any outliers are represented with a cross on the outside of
the whiskers
If there is an outlier then the whisker will end at the
value before the outlier
Only one axis is used when graphing a box plot
It is still important to make sure the axis has a clear,
Stuck on something?
even scale and is labelled with units
Ask questions and get help with
Box plots are often used for comparing two sets of data
exactly what you're revising.
Both box plots will be drawn one above the other on
the same scale on the x-axis
Got it
They are useful for comparing data because it is easy
to see the main shape of the distribution of the data
from a box plot

---

The key features of a box plot
Worked Example
The incomplete box plot below shows the tail lengths in cm of
some students’ pets.
(a) Given that the median tail length was 21 cm, complete the
box plot.
(b) Find the range and interquartile range of the tail lengths.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Remember a box plot is a graph and should be treated
like one, even though there is only one axis. It should have

---

a title, a clear, even scale that is labelled with units if there
are any. If drawing two box plots on the same axis label
each one clearly.
Did this video help you? Yes No
Cumulative frequency
What is a cumulative frequency
graph?
A cumulative frequency graph is used with data that has
been organised into a grouped frequency table
The cumulative frequency graph can be used to find
estimates of percentiles and quartiles
As the data is grouped, it is not possible to find the
actual values of these statistics
What are the main features of a
cumulative frequency graph?
A cumulative frequency graph considers how much data
there is up to a certain value, including the data in that
group and the one below
Cumulative frequency will always be plotted on the y – axis
Consider the scale carefully because this will usually
be a large number
You may be asked to add to one or both axes,
remember to label both axes clearly and include units
on the x – axis if they are needed
The cumulative frequency is calculated by adding the
frequency in each group, or class, to the frequency in the
ones before
This is essentially accumulating the frequencies as
you go
The cumulative frequency for each class must be plotted
against the upper boundary of each corresponding class
The cumulative frequency that corresponds with each
upper boundary will not only consider the frequency
of the data in that class, but all of the data in the
groups below it too

---

When the points have been plotted they should be joined
up with a smooth curve
However, some may be joined with straight lines from
point to point
How do we read statistics from a
cumulative frequency graph?
Quartiles and percentiles can be read from a cumulative
frequency graph
The median, Q is read from the y – axis scale at the n
2
2
th value
The lower quartile, Q ,is read from the nth value and
1
4
the upper quartile, Q is read from the 3nth value
3
4
Any percentile can be read from the graph by finding
the percent of the total frequency and reading from
the value on the y - axis
To read the corresponding data value once the position
on the y – axis is known, use a ruler to draw a line from the y
– axis to the graph and then down to the x – axis
Sometimes the frequency of values greater than or less
than a particular data value will need to be found, this time
you will have to read from the x – axis to the y – axis
Take particular care if the question asks for a
frequency greater than a particular data value, the
value found from the y – axis will need to be
subtracted from the total frequency
Worked Example
The cumulative frequency graph below shows the lengths in
cm, l , of a group of puppies in a training group.
(i) Given that the group 40 <l ≤ 45 was one of the groups
used in the data collection, find the number of puppies that
were in this group.

---

(ii) Use the graph to find an estimate for the interquartile range
of the puppies.
(iii) x % of the puppies are greater than 53.5cm long, use your
graph to find an estimate for the value of x.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
If you are asked to read values from your graph make sure
you use a ruler and mark the lines on clearly to show where
you took your readings from. Remember that the graph
shows the accumulated frequencies so if you need only
the frequency you may need to subtract the previous
value.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics

---

Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.