Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Correlation & Regression
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Scatter diagrams
What does bivariate data mean?
A lot of statistics is about looking at how different factors,
Help me understand
or variables change how data behaves
Bivariate data is data which is collected on two variables
and looks at how one of the factors affects the other
Each data value from one variable will be paired with a
data value from the other variable
The two variables are often related, but do not have to
be
What is a scatter diagram?
A scatter diagram is a way of graphing bivariate data
You may be asked to plot, or add to, a scatter diagram
One variable will be on the x – axis and the other will
be on the y– axis
The variable that can be controlled in the data
collection is known as the independent or
explanatory variable and is plotted on the x – axis Stuck on something?
The variable that is measured or discovered in the
Ask questions and get help with
data collection is known as the dependent or
exactly what you're revising.
response variable and is plotted on the y – axis
Got it
Scatter diagrams allow statisticians to look for
relationships between the two variables
Some scatter diagrams will show a clear relationship
know as correlation (see below)

---

Others will not display an obvious relationship
If a scatter diagram shows a relationship you may be
asked to identify outliers
Worked Example
The scatter diagram below shows the number of Save My
Exams question packs completed by a group of students and
the percentage score they received in their A-Level Statistics
exam.
(i) State which of the variables is the explanatory variable and
which is the response variable.
(ii) Explain why the number of question packs completed is on
the x– axis.
(iii) Another student completed 50 question packs and
scored 80% on their A Level Statistics exam, add this data to
the scatter diagram.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Learn the vocabulary for the types of variables as you
could be asked a question on this. Make sure you check
the scales carefully when plotting any points.
Did this video help you? Yes No
Correlation
What is correlation?
Correlation is how the relationship between the two
variables is described
Perfect linear correlation means that the bivariate data
will all lie on a straight line on a scatter diagram
Linear correlation can be positive or negative and it can
be strong or weak
Positive correlation describes a data set where both
variables are increasing
Negative correlation describes a data set where one
variable is increasing and the other is decreasing
When describing correlation you should say whether it is
positive or negative and also say whether it is strong or

---

weak
If correlation exists then there could be outliers, these will
be data points that do not fit the pattern seen on the
graph
There will likely be a maximum of one or two outliers
on any scatter diagram
You may be asked to identify the outliers
What is the difference between
correlation and causation?
It is important to be aware that just because correlation
exists, it does not mean that the change in one of the
variables is causing the change in the other variable
Correlation does not imply causation!
If a change in one variable causes a change in the other
then the two variables are said to have a causal
relationship
Observing correlation between two variables does
not always mean that there is a causal relationship
Look at the two variables in question and consider the
context of the question to decide if there could be a
causal relationship
If the two variables are temperature and number
of ice creams sold at a park then it is likely to be a
causal relationship
Correlation may exist between global
temperatures and the number of monkeys kept
as pets in the UK but they are unlikely to have a
causal relationship
Observing a relationship between two variables can
allow you to create a hypothesis about those two
variables
Worked Example
The scatter diagram below shows the number of Save My
Exams question packs completed by a group of students and
the percentage score they received in their A-Level Statistics
exam.

---

(i) Describe the correlation shown in the scatter diagram.
(ii) Decide if you think there could be a causal relationship
between the two variables and explain your reasoning.
Answer:
Did this video help you? Yes No
Linear regression
What is linear regression?
If strong linear correlation exists on a scatter diagram,
then a line of best fit can be drawn

---

This is a linear graph added to the scatter diagram
that best approximates the relationship between the
two variables
At GCSE this will have been drawn by eye as a line that
fits closest to the data values
The data can be used to calculate the equation of the
straight line that represents the best fit of the
relationship between the two variables
You do not need to know how to calculate it but
you will need to be able to interpret one
The least squares regression line is the line of best fit that
minimises the sum of the squares of the gap between the
line and each data value
This is usually called the regression line and can be
calculated either be looking at the vertical or the
horizontal distances between the line and the data
values
If the regression line is calculated by looking at the
vertical distances it is called the regression line of y
on x
If the regression line is calculated by looking at the
horizontal distances it is called the regression line of x
on y
The regression line of x on y is rarely used and you
are unlikely to come across it at this level
The regression line of y on x is written in the form y=a+bx
b is the gradientof the line and represents the
change in y for each individual unit change in x
a is the y – intercept and shows the value of y for
which x is zero
You are not expected to calculate the regression line in
your exam but you should be prepared to draw one onto a
scatter diagram, interpret or use one to predict values
It is useful to know that the point ( ⎯ x ⎯ , ⎯ y ⎯ ) will lie on the
regression line
How do I use a regression line?
Drawing a regression line is done in the same way as
drawing a straight line graph, substitute some values from
the independent data set to help you
The regression line can be used to decide what type of
correlation there is if there is no scatter diagram
If b is positive then the data set has positive
correlation and if b is negative then the data set has
negative correlation
The value of b can be used to interpret how the data is
changing
b is the gradient of the line and represents the change
in y for each individual unit change in x
The regression line can also be used to predict the value
of a dependent variable from an independent variable
Predictions should only be made for values of the
dependent variable that are within the range of the
given data
Making a prediction within the range of the given data
is called interpolation
Making a prediction outside of the range of the given
data is called extrapolation and is much less reliable

---

The prediction will be more reliable if the number of
data values in the original sample set is bigger
Worked Example
The scatter diagram below shows the number of Save My
Exams question packs completed by a group of students, x,
and the percentage score they received in their A-Level
Statistics exam, y.
The equation of the regression line of y on x is y=18+1.3x
(i) Draw the regression line onto the scatter diagram.
(ii) Interpret the meaning of the values 18 and 1.3 in the scatter
diagram.
(iii) Explain why the regression line given should not be used to
estimate the percentage when someone has completed 80
question packs.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Remember that the value of b is the gradient of the
regression line, a greater value of b does not mean
stronger correlation. When using a regression line to
make a prediction make sure that the value you are
predicting from falls within the range of the data used to
calculate the regression line.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No

---

Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.