Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Data Presentation
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 25 November 2025
Did this video help you? Yes No
Data presentation
What graphs and diagrams should I
be familiar with?
You will be expected to be able to use a variety of graphs
such as:
Box plots
Can be used with ungrouped data of a single
variable
Shows the range, interquartile range and quartiles
clearly
Very useful for comparing data patterns quickly
Cumulative frequency graphs
Can be used with continuous grouped data of a Help me understand
single variable
Shows the running total of the frequencies that
fall below the upper bound of each class
Histograms
Can be used with continuous grouped data of a Stuck on something?
single variable
Ask questions and get help with
Can be used with varying group sizes
exactly what you're revising.
Shows the frequencies of the group, represented
by the area of each bar
Got it
Frequency polygon
Displays the shape of continuous grouped data

---

Created by joining the midpoints at the top of
each bar of a histogram
Scatter diagrams
Can be used with ungrouped bivariate data (data
for two variables)
Shows the pattern of the relationship between
the variables
You will not be expected to draw the graphs from scratch
but you may be asked to add to a graph
You should make sure you know how to draw them
anyway as it will help strengthen your understanding
of the graphs
Prior knowledge of some other ‘unfamiliar’ diagrams such
as interpreting a stem and leaf diagram is expected
Review statistical diagrams from GCSE and make sure
you remember how to use them
If there is an unfamiliar diagram in your exam, you will
be able to work out how to read it by looking at the
scales and labels carefully
What should I look out for when
interpreting graphs?
Look carefully at the context of the information given in
the graph
Check the scales on both axes carefully, including units
Sometimes the numbers will be abbreviated to fit on
the scale, for example if a population is given in
millions then the number 60 will represent 60 000
000
Look carefully at the labels and units to determine
how a value should be read
If there is more than one graph represented on the same
set of axes take extra care to ensure you are reading from
the correct one
Beware of misleading graphs, the scales on the axes, units
and representation can be manipulated to make a graph
look more/less convincing
Worked Example
A student is collecting information on his friends’ interests and
believes that his friends who only have dogs spend more time
outside than his friends who only have cats. He has surveyed
20 friends with only cats and 20 friends with only dogs and
has written down the total amount of time, rounded to the
nearest hour, each of them spent outside last week. Describe,
with a reason, which diagram would be best for the student to
use to display the data.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Take the time needed when working with diagrams, they
are usually ‘easy marks’ questions but it is common for
students to rush them and make silly mistakes.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology

---

Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.