Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Frequency Tables
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Ungrouped data
A frequency table for ungrouped data shows the
frequency of individual data values
Why use a frequency table for
ungrouped data?
When collecting large amounts of raw data, it is quicker to
use a tally system and then collate the results into a
frequency table
Ungrouped frequency tables are normally used for
numerical, discrete data
Organising data into a frequency table makes it easier to
work with
Calculating averages, ranges and summary statistics
can be done much quicker from a frequency table
than from raw data
It gives a clear pattern of the data
It is easy to quickly see where most of the data are
and to see extreme values Stuck on something?
A frequency table for ungrouped data keeps all of the Ask questions and get help with
original data values exactly what you're revising.
It is still possible to calculate the actual averages,
Got it
ranges and summary statistics
How are the mean, median and
mode calculated from an

---

ungrouped frequency table?
You should already be familiar with finding the mean,
median and mode from raw, ungrouped data
The mode is the value that occurs most often in a data set
In an ungrouped frequency table the data value with
the highest frequency will be the mode
The median is the middle value when the data is in order of
size Help me understand
To find the median from an ungrouped frequency
table, add the frequencies together until you reach
the value that is half of the total
For a data set of values, calculate n+1 and the
2
median will be whichever data value corresponds with
this frequency
The mean is the sum of all the values divided by the
number of values in the data set
To find the mean, multiply each data value by its
corresponding frequency, find the sum of these
values and then divide by the total frequency
The notation for the sum of the values is Σxf
The formula for the mean from a frequency table is
Σxf
Σf
Worked Example
The frequency table below gives information about the shoe
size of a group of year 12 students.
Shoe Size 37 37.5 38 38.5 39 39.5 40 40.5 4
Frequency 3 3 12 5 16 9 7 4 1
(i) Write down the modal shoe size.
(ii) Explain how you know that the median shoe size is 39.
(iii) Calculate the mean shoe size.
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Use common sense when checking your answers, is your
mean within the range of the data? Does is seem right? A
mean of 140 for example could not be correct if the data
is about ages of students taking an exam at university.
Did this video help you? Yes No
Grouped data
A frequency table for grouped data is usually used for
large amounts of continuous data

---

They show the frequency of data values that are within a
particular group or class
What are the advantages and
disadvantages of grouping data?
Grouping data is especially useful when data can take a
large range of different values
Trends and patterns can be easily spotted when data has
been grouped
Calculations are much quicker with data that has been
grouped
It is important to be aware, however, that grouped
frequency tables also have some negatives
The actual data values are lost when data is grouped
It is only possible to calculate estimated averages,
ranges and summary statistics
What notation is used for grouped
frequency tables?
When grouping data, it is important to be clear about
which group or class any data value should be entered
into
A group entry of 10 – 20 followed by 20 – 30 would be
unclear because the number 20 could be entered into
both groups
If the data are discrete, this could be written as 10
– 19 and 20 – 29
For continuous data, this could be changed to 10
– and 20 –
This would most likely be represented as
10≤x<20 and 20≤x<30
Most commonly inequalities are used to group continuous
data as they leave no ambiguity
If the data are continuous, always check that there are no
gaps between upper boundary of a class and the lower
boundary of the next class
If there are gaps you will need to close these gaps by
changing the boundaries before carrying out any
calculations
For example, the groups 10≤x≤19 followed by
20≤x≤29 will become 9.5≤x<19.5 and
19.5≤x<29.5
Check the inequality signs carefully
Be careful when deciding what category the data falls
into, taking the group 10≤x≤19 for example,
if the data had been rounded it would take the form
9.5≤x<19.5 as described above
if the data had been truncated however, then the
boundaries would become 10≤x<20
this is most likely to happen with age, which is
technically a continuous variable due to being
able to take any value, however we would usually
consider age by counting years
How do I find averages from
grouped frequency tables?
Instead of finding the mode, when working with a grouped
frequency table we instead find the modal class

---

This will be the class (group) with the greatest
frequency
It is only possible to calculate an estimate for the mean
and the median from a grouped frequency table
Calculating the estimated mean is the same as for
ungrouped frequency tables, however you will need to
find the midpoints first
the midpoint is the mean of the upper and lower
values in the class boundaries
multiply the midpoint by its corresponding frequency,
find the sum of these values and then divide by n
Calculating the estimated median is more complicated
and can involve using linear interpolation
How do I use linear interpolation on
grouped data?
For grouped data, the median, quartiles and percentiles
can be found using a process called linear interpolation
Interpolation uses the assumption that the data values are
evenly spread throughout each class
Once you know which data value you are looking for,
interpolation uses proportion to find how far through
each class the data value should be
It is important to remember to add on the lower-class
boundary after finding the correct data value
Follow these steps to use linear interpolation to find the
median, quartiles or percentiles:
Step 1. Find the place within the data where the value you are
looking to find is positioned, e.g. the median will be the n th
2
value
Step 2. Add up the frequencies until you know which class this
value will fall into (this is finding the cumulative frequency)
Step 3. Write the upper- and lower-class boundaries of this
group on the upper side of a simple number line
Step 4. On the other side of the same number line add the
lower and upper values of the cumulative frequency for this
group to the ends of the line
Step 5. Use proportion to calculate the data value that is the
same fraction of the way through the group on the upper side
of the number line as where the value you are looking for would
sit on the lower side of the number line
To see these steps in action, go to part (iv) of the worked
example
This method can be used to find any percentile, for
example the 81st percentile will be the value that is 81 ths
100
of the way through the data
Worked Example
The table below shows the heights in cm of a group of year 12
students.

---

Height, h Frequency
150 ≤h <155 3
155 ≤h <160 5
160 ≤h <165 9
165 ≤h <170 7
170 ≤h <175 1
(i) Write down the class that a student of exactly 160 cm
should be added to.
(ii) Write down the modal class.
(iii) Calculate the estimated mean height.
(iv) Use linear interpolation to find the interquartile range of
the heights
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
There can be a lot of calculations when working with
grouped frequency tables, be extra careful when using
your calculators as it is easy to make small errors with
these questions. Use the table and add information to the
table as you go as there will be marks available for
showing work within the methods. Make sure you know
how to use your calculator to find all of the summary
statistics as this can save time and reduce errors.
Teacher only

---

New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next
Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support

---

© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.