Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
Hypothesis Testing for
Correlation
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Hypothesis testing for
correlation
You should be familiar with using a hypothesis test to
determine bias within probability problems. It is also possible
to use a hypothesis test to determine whether a given product
moment correlation coefficient calculated from a sample
could be representative of the same relationship existing
within the whole population. For full information on
hypothesis testing, see the revision notes from section 5.1.1
Hypothesis Testing
Why use a hypothesis test for
correlation?
In most cases it is too difficult to get the value of the
PMCC for a whole population
This would involve having data on each individual
within the whole population Stuck on something?
It is very rare that a statistician would have the time or
Ask questions and get help with
resources to collect all of that data
exactly what you're revising.
The PMCC for the whole population can instead be
estimated using information from a sample taken from the Got it
population
The PMCC for a whole population is denoted ρ
(pronounced rho)

---

The PMCC for a sample taken from the population is
Help me understand
denoted r
A hypothesis test would be conducted using the value
of r to determine whether the population can be said
to have positive, negative or zero correlation
How do I use the table of critical
values for correlation coefficients?
The table of critical values is found near the end of the
Mathematical Formulae and Statistical Tables booklet you
will have in your exam
It displays the minimum values that need to be reached by
a value of r in order for the test to be significant
Find the significant value by looking at the value that is in
both the row of the number in the sample, n, and in the
column for the significance level of the test
Values are given for sample sizes of 4≤n≤30 and then
40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and 100
Values are given for significance levels of 10% (0.1),
5% (0.05), 2.5% (0.025), 1% (0.01) and 0.5% (0.005)
The table gives values for one - tailed tests only
To find the significant values for two - tailed tests
halve the significance level first and then carry out the
test as if doing a one-tailed test
The table gives values for positive values of r only
To find the significant values if you are testing for
negative correlation look for the corresponding
positive value of r and change the sign to a negative
A two-tailed test will have two critical values (both the
same value but one positive and one negative)
How do I lay out a hypothesis test
for correlation?
Most of the time the hypothesis test will be carried out by
using a critical value
You won't be expected to calculate p-values but you
might be given a p-value
Step 1. Write the null and alternative hypotheses clearly
The hypothesis test could either be a one-tailed test
or a two-tailed test
The null hypothesis will always be H:ρ=0
0
The alternative hypothesis will depend on if it is a one-
tailed or two-tailed test
A one-tailed test would test to see if the
population PMCC, ρ, is either positive or
negative
The alternative hypothesis, H will be
1
H :ρ>0 or H :ρ<0
1 1
A two-tailed test would test to see if the
population PMCC, ρ , is not equal to zero
(meaning there is some form of linear correlation)
The alternative hypothesis, H will be
1
H :ρ≠0
1
Step 2. Find the critical value for the test
The critical value will be determined by both the
significance level of the test and the sample size, n
For a positive value of r :

---

The greater the sample size, the lower r
needs to be to determine that ρ is also
positive
The greater the significance level the lower r
needs to be to determine that ρ is also
positive
The critical value for can be found by using the table
of critical values given in the Mathematical Formulae
and Statistical Tables booklet
Make sure you know how to find this and are
familiar with using it before your exam
Step 3. Compare the value ofrcalculated from the
sample with the critical value
If r is in the critical region the test is significant and the
null hypothesis should be rejected
It will be in the critical region if
r > criticalvalue 
If r is not in the critical region the null hypothesis
should be accepted and the alternative hypothesis
should be rejected
Step 4. Write a conclusion in context
Use the wording in the question to help you write your
conclusion
If rejecting the null hypothesis your conclusion should
state that there is sufficientevidence to suggest the
alternative hypothesis is true at this level of
significance
If accepting the null hypothesis your conclusion
should state that there is not enough evidence to
suggest the alternative hypothesis is true at this level
of significance
Occasionally the hypothesis test will be carried out by
comparing a p - value with the significance level instead
You will not be expected to calculate the p - value, it
will be given in the question
Steps 1 and 4 will be the same, however you should
compare the p - value with the significance level in
step 3 (there is no step 2)
If the p - value is less than the significance level
the test is significant and the null hypothesis
should be rejected
If the p - value is greater than the significance
level the null hypothesis should be accepted and
the alternative hypothesis should be rejected
Worked Example
A student believes that there is a positive correlation between
the number of hours spent studying for a test and the
percentage scored on it.
The student takes a random sample of 10 of his friends and
records the amount of revision they did and percentage they
score in the test.
The student calculates the product moment correlation
coefficient for these data as r=0.668.

---

Carry out a hypothesis test at the 5% level of significance to
test whether the student’s claim is justified.
Answer:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
Make sure you read the question carefully to determine
whether the test you are carrying out is for a one-tailed or
a two-tailed test and use the level of significance
accordingly. A test is only one-tailed if you are told to test
for positive or negative correlation. If the question says
test for correlation, then it is a two-tailed test, even if you
think the correlation would be positive.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next

---

Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.