Edexcel A Level Maths: Statistics Revision Notes
PMCC & Non-linear
Regression
Exam code:9MA0 Download PDF
Written by:Amber
Updated on 16 February 2026
Did this video help you? Yes No
Product moment
correlation coefficient
(PMCC)
What is the product moment
correlation coefficient?
The product moment correlation coefficient (PMCC) is a
way of giving a numerical value to linear correlation of
bivariate data
The PMCC of a sample is denoted by the letter r
r can take any value such that −1≤r≤1
A positive value of r describes positive correlation
A negative value of r describes negative correlation
If r=0 there is no correlation
r=1 means perfect positive correlation and r=−1
means perfect negative correlation
The closer to 1 or -1, the stronger the correlation Stuck on something?
Help me understand
The gradient does not change the value of r Ask questions and get help with
exactly what you're revising.
Got it

---

How is the product moment
correlation coefficient calculated?
You must learn how to use your calculator to calculate
value of the PMCC, r for the relationship between two
variables
All calculators are different and you should make sure you
can calculate the PMCC on your personal calculator
Make sure you know how put your calculator into the
statistics mode
You will be given the option to turn the frequency
on or off, choose off for most calculations of the
PMCC
With the statistics mode switched on on your
calculator, there will be a ‘statistics’ option, followed
by a regression option in the form A + BX
Your calculator will give you two columns into
which you can input the x and y data values
Once the data has been entered into your calculator,
choose the ‘r’ value from the ‘STAT’ options
Worked Example
Three scatter diagrams, showing observations from different
bivariate data sets, are shown above.
(i) Match each of the three scatter diagrams show above to
one of the values of r given below. You should use each given
value of r no more than once.
Answer:

---

r=−0.7134
r=0.1652
r=0.8134
r=−0.9993
(ii) Sketch a scatter diagram for the remaining value of r listed
above.
Answer:
Did this video help you? Yes No
Non-linear regression
You have learned how to use linear regression models to
describe a relationship between two variables. However, it is
possible for two variables to have a relationship that does not
fit a linear model, but still shows a pattern based on
exponential growth or decay. A linear regression model is only
appropriate if the PMCC is close to 1 or -1.
What are non-linear regression
models?
If a bivariate data set appears to have a non – linear
relationship it could fit an exponential model
A non – linear regression model could take the form
y=axn or y=kbx where a, n, k and b are constants

---

It is possible to use logarithms to rearrange the non – linear
form of the model to obtain a linear regression model
which can then be used to examine trends in the data
If the regression model takes the form y=axn the
data should be coded from x- values to y- values
using X=logx and Y=logy
If y=axn for constants a and n, then
logy=loga+nlogxorY=nX+loga
Plotting logx against logy will give a linear graph
The y – intercept would be loga and the gradient
of the line would be n
This can be shown by taking logarithms of both
sides
If the regression model takes the form y=kbx the data
should be coded from x values to y values using X=x
and Y=logy
If y=kbx for constants k and b , then
logy=logk+xlogb or Y=(logb)X+logk
Plotting x against logy will give a linear graph
The y – intercept would be logk and the gradient
of the line would be logb
This can be shown in the same way by taking
logarithms of both sides
For example:
y=kbx
Take logarithms of both sides
logy=log(kbx)
Use the addition law for logarithms
logy=logk+logbx
Use the power law for logarithms
logy=logk+xlogb
Using logarithms to code the data in this way is called
changing the variables
How do I use non–linear regression
models?
Non – linear regression models can be used in much the
same way as linear regression models
By coding the original data using logarithms (changing the
variables) a regression line of Y on X can be found
This can be used to make predictions for data values
that are within the range of the given data
(interpolation)
Making a prediction outside of the range of the given
data is called extrapolation and should not be done
The non – linear regression model can then be found by
substituting logx and logy back into the X and Y values in
the regression line and rearranging
Worked Example

---

The graph below shows the distribution of the height, h m, of a
group of children and the amount of time, t hours, they spend
napping in the day. It is believed the data can be modelled
using the form t = khn .
The data are coded using the changes of variables X =logh
and Y =logt. The regression line of Y on X is found to be
Y = −3.5X .
(i) Find the values of X and Y for a child that is 75 cm tall and
naps for 4 hours per day, giving your answers to four decimal
places.
(ii) Using the regression line, show that a child of height 0.9
metres would be expected to nap for approximately 1.45
hours per day.
(iii) State an assumption that was made in order to justify the
use of the regression line in part (ii).
(iv) By first substituting logh for X and logt for Y in the
equation of the regression line given, show that the
relationship between the height of a child and the time they
spend sleeping can be modelled by t =h−3.5 .
Answer:

---

Examiner Tips and Tricks
Be careful when using original and coded data
interchangeably, it is easy to forget which one you are
working with. Remember that if your regression line was
calculated using coded data then you will need to reverse
this if finding predictions. Make sure that you are familiar
with using logarithms, indices and their laws. Be careful to
check which base logarithms were used for coding the
data, if logx was used then it is reversed using 10logx, but
is lnx was used then it should be reversed using elnx.
Teacher only
New! Exclusive Teacher-
Only Questions
Fresh, expert-written questions
Students can’t access them
Fair accurate tests - built fast
Explore in Test Builder
Test yourself
Was this revision note helpful? Yes No
Previous Next

---

Course Study tools All topics
Resources Dashboard
Learning Hub Overview
Scholarship Brand ambassador
Join Profile
Past Papers Subscription
Solution Banks Settings
Sitemap Log out
Company Subjects
About us Biology
Exam Specificity Chemistry
Content Quality Physics
Promotions Maths
Jobs Geography
Terms English Literature
Privacy Psychology
Cookie Policy All Subjects
Help and Support
© Copyright 2015−2026 Save My Exams Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
Neither IBO nor College Board were involved in the production of, and do not endorse, the resources created by Save My Exams.